---
layout: distill
title: The inconvenient truth about AI
date: 2023-12-10 10:00:00-0000
description: 
tags: induction, deduction, computation, AI
categories: computation, AGI
related_posts: false

authors:
  - name: Pedro A. Ortega
    url: "https://www.adaptiveagents.org"
    affiliations:
      name: DAIOS
---

> "Their words and thoughts were so clear, that whatever they said, came to be."
>
>
> --*Popol Vuh (Mayan Creation Myth)*

> "You insist that there is something that a machine can't do. If you will tell me precisely what it is that a machine cannot do, then I can always make a machine which will do just that." 
>
> --*John von Neumann*.


Like many, I believe that the hallmark of intelligence is the ability to recognize patterns. In fact, most of the other abilities commonly associated with intelligence, such as learning, planning, analogical reasoning, and more, can be seen as either directly connected to or dependent upon our capacity for pattern recognition.

Let's take for instance the sequence

$$
  \text{B123A, A231B, B312A, A123B, } \ldots
$$

If you feel very strongly that the next string should be $$\text{B231A}$$, then this is because you've recognized a **pattern**, even though this is most likely the first time you've seen this sequence. Once you've found the pattern, you then used it to predict the next string in the sequence.


## Pattern recognition and computation

Pattern recognition and computation are intimately related to each other.

**Computation** is the process that takes a program $$p$$ as input and then uses it to mechanically generate an output sequence $$x_1 x_2 \ldots$$. Thus, if you can express unambiguously how to do a task, then computation will perform the exact task you've described. The [Church-Turing thesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church%E2%80%93Turing_thesis) states that the mechanical processes are precisely those computable by a Turing machine. 

**Pattern recognition** can be regarded as the inverse process: given an input sequence $$x_1 x_2 \ldots$$ it finds a program $$p$$ that would mechanically compute said sequence. In other words,

$$
  \text{Pattern-Recognition}(x) = \text{Computation}^{-1}(p).
$$

In this sense, a pattern is a program. Programs serve as a broad (if not the broadest) framework for describing relationships of the parts within a whole. They encompass symmetries, arithmetic sequences, fractals, even the geometrical patterns within your carpet.

### How does this relate to logic?

Logic identifies two distinct reasoning methods:

- **Deduction:** This process yields inevitable conclusions based on given premises and rules. For example, if all humans are mortal (premise) and Socrates is a human (premise), then Socrates is mortal (necessary conclusion).

- **Induction:** This method produces general, but not necessarily certain, rules derived from specific observations. An example is observing that the sun has risen every day in recorded history and thus inducing that the sun will rise every day (a general rule, but not an absolute certainty).

While logicians sometimes acknowledge a third form reasoning called **Abduction**, i.e. the process of creating explanatory hypotheses for observed phenomena, I won't explore it separately here, as it is subsumed by induction in the definitions I'll give below.

Thus we can establish the following parallels:

$$
  \begin{align*}
    \text{Deduction} &\longleftrightarrow \text{Computation} \\ 
    \text{Induction} &\longleftrightarrow \text{Pattern Recognition}
  \end{align*}
$$

Computation parallels deduction, where specific outputs are derived from defined inputs and rules, and pattern recognition is akin to induction, where general patterns or rules are inferred from sets of data or observations.

## Computable processes

We've pointed out the connection to logic. Now we dig a bit deeper.

So far, I've talked about computation and pattern recognition as processes, but I didn't specify what kind of processes they are. Answering this question will reveal that they are fundamentally different in nature.

The concept of **Computation Process**, wherein a program is interpreted and executed, is intriguingly a program in its own right: it is a mechanical process that can be described with a finite amount of information, in spite of its universality. This profound insight is a cornerstone of computer science. In 1936, Alan Turing demonstrated that specific programs, now known as **Universal Turing Machines** (UTMs), are capable of running any given program. In the modern context, the most familiar form of a UTM is a programming language interpreter. Despite their commonplace presence in today's digital world, the fundamental significance of Turing's discovery remains remarkably profound. 

Given this understanding, one might wonder about the nature of the **Pattern Recognition Process**. As it appears to be the converse of the Computation Process, can it too be defined as a program? This raises a profound question about the essence of intelligence: Can the fundamental mechanisms of intelligence be encapsulated in a finite set of rules? Essentially, this means exploring whether there exists a fixed rule set capable of transforming any set of observations into a program that replicates them, assuming such a program is feasible.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solomonoff%27s_theory_of_inductive_inference#:~:text=Solomonoff's%20uncomputability,-Unfortunately%2C%20Solomonoff%20also&text=The%20proof%20of%20this%20is,negates%20the%20computable%20induction's%20prediction.






This is in stark contrast to the **Induction Process**.



<div class="row mt-1">
    <div class="col-sm mt-1 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="/assets/img/forward-reverse-kl.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true alt="Pedro A. Ortega at the NIH, Bethesda (Washington DC)" %}
    </div>
</div>

